📖 clusterctl: initial set of documentation (#1994)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/clusterctl/contract.md

# The `clusterctl` contract

The `clusterctl` command is designed to work with all the providers compliant with the following rules.

## Provider Repositories

Each providers MUST define a **provider repository**, that is a well-known place where the release assets for 
a provider are published.

The provider repository should contain the following files:

> * The metadata YAML

Author: It make a lot of sense! done

If, as a provider implementer, you are interested to be added to this list, please send a PR to the cluster-api repository.

</aside>

<aside class="note">

<h1>Customizing the list of providers</h1>

It is possible to customize the list of providers for each `clusterctl` by changing the [clusterctl configuration](configuring-clusterctl.md).

</aside>

### Metadata YAML

The provider is required to generate a **metadata YAML** file and publish it to the provider's repository.

The metadata YAML file documents the release series of each provider and maps each release series to a ClusterAPI version.

For example, for CAPI:

```yaml
apiVersion: clusterctl.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: Metadata
releaseSeries:
- major: 0
  minor: 3
  clusterAPIVersion: v1alpha3
- major: 0
  minor: 2
  clusterAPIVersion: v1alpha2
```

<aside class="note">

<h1> Embedded metadata </h1>

The `clusterctl` command can ship with embedded metadata for pre-defined providers.
If, as a provider implementer, you are interested to this feature, please send a PR to the cluster-api repository.

</aside>

### Components YAML 

> The provider is required to generate a **components YAML** file, that is a single YAML with _all_ the components required 

Author: Nice. Done

for installing the provider itself (CRDs, Controller, RBAC etc.) and publish it to the provider's repository. 
Following rules apply:

#### Naming conventions

> It is strongly recommended that:

Author: clusterctl does not really care about the name of the components YAML file (it is given as part of the repository URL). 
I added this recommendation only for the sake of consistency

1. The default cluster template should be named `config-{bootstrap}.yaml`. e.g `config-kubeadm.yaml`
2. Additional cluster template should be named `config-{flavor}-{bootstrap}.yaml`. e.g `config-production-kubeadm.yaml`

`{bootstrap}` is the name of the bootstrap provider used in the template; `{flavor}` is the name the user can pass to the
`clusterctl config cluster --flavor` flag to identify the specific template to use.
 
Each provider SHOULD create user facing documentation with the list of available cluster templates.

#### Target namespace

The cluster template YAML MUST assume the target namespace already exists.

All the objects in the cluster template YAML MUST be deployed in the same namespace. 

#### Variables

Also the cluster templates YAML can contain environment variables (same as components YAML).

Additionally, each provider should create user facing documentation with the list of required variables and with all the additional
notes that are required to assist the user in defining the value for each value.

<aside class="note">

<h1> Common variables </h1>

> The `clusterctl config cluster` command provides CLI flags for a small set of common variables:

Author: Done.
I hope the new version is easier to understand

> # The `clusterctl` contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# clusterctl Provider Contract
```

1. The default cluster template should be named `config-{bootstrap}.yaml`. e.g `config-kubeadm.yaml`
2. Additional cluster template should be named `config-{flavor}-{bootstrap}.yaml`. e.g `config-production-kubeadm.yaml`

`{bootstrap}` is the name of the bootstrap provider used in the template; `{flavor}` is the name the user can pass to the
`clusterctl config cluster --flavor` flag to identify the specific template to use.
 
Each provider SHOULD create user facing documentation with the list of available cluster templates.

#### Target namespace

The cluster template YAML MUST assume the target namespace already exists.

All the objects in the cluster template YAML MUST be deployed in the same namespace. 

#### Variables

The cluster templates YAML can also contain environment variables (as can the components YAML).

Additionally, each provider should create user facing documentation with the list of required variables and with all the additional
notes that are required to assist the user in defining the value for each variable.

##### Common variables

The `clusterctl config cluster` command allows user to set a small set of common variables via CLI flags or command arguments.

> Templates writers should use the common variables to ensure consistency across providers and a simpler user experience

Reviewer 2: Probably stronger than 'should'? Given the current implementation, the use of these variable names for the purpose they are intended is mandantory.

Also the absence of some these variables can lead to surprises in the UX. Say, if a template is opinionated about the number of control plane nodes it should create (e.g. a 'dev' template that hard codes that number to 1 to minimize resource usage), a user attempting to use said template while specifying 
```... --controlplane-machine-count 3 --worker-machine-count 5 
```
would see only part of his intent satisfied in an otherwise fully functional configuration without warning

Author: This is correct.
The authors of templates should provide documentation, and in case the template is opinionated, also the underlying assumptions (e.g. 1 worker to minimize resources) should be documented.

However, if this became a problem, we should always change this into a minimal set of required variables, but TBH, I fear this is too much restrictive ATM

(if compared to the usage of OS environment variables or the `clusterctl` config file).

| CLI flag                | Variable name     | Note                                        |
| ---------------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
|`--target-namespace`| `${ NAMESPACE }` | The namespace where the workload cluster should be deployed |
|`--kubernetes-version`| `${ KUBERNETES_VERSION }` | The Kubernetes version to use for the workload cluster |
|`--controlplane-machine-count`| `${ CONTROLPLANE_MACHINE_COUNT }` | The number of control plane machines to be added to the workload cluster |
|`--worker-machine-count`| `${ WORKER_MACHINE_COUNT }` | The number of worker machines to be added to the workload cluster |

> Additionally, the `${ CLUSTER_NAME }` variable name can be used for accessing the `clusterctl config cluster <cluster-name>` argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the value of the command argument to `clusterctl config cluster <cluster-name>` (<cluster-name> in this case), will be applied to every occurance of the `${ CLUSTER_NAME }` variable.
```

* Workload cluster templates

<aside class="note">

<h1> Pre-defined list of providers </h1>

The `clusterctl` command ships with a pre-defined list of provider repositories that allows a simpler "out-of-the-box" user experience.
If, as a provider implementer, you are interested to be added to this list, please send a PR to the Cluster API repository.

</aside>

<aside class="note">

<h1>Customizing the list of providers</h1>

It is possible to customize the list of providers for `clusterctl` by changing the [clusterctl configuration](configuring-clusterctl.md).

</aside>

### Metadata YAML

The provider is required to generate a **metadata YAML** file and publish it to the provider's repository.

The metadata YAML file documents the release series of each provider and maps each release series to a Cluster API version.

For example, for Cluster API:

```yaml
apiVersion: clusterctl.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: Metadata
releaseSeries:
- major: 0
  minor: 3
  clusterAPIVersion: v1alpha3
- major: 0
  minor: 2
  clusterAPIVersion: v1alpha2
```

<aside class="note">

<h1> Embedded metadata </h1>

The `clusterctl` command can ship with embedded metadata for pre-defined providers.

> If, as a provider implementer, you are interested to this feature, please send a PR to the Cluster API repository.

Author: 24-25 talks about the embedded list of providers
here it is talking about the embedded metadata
